---
index: 0
title: VIP Purpose And Guidelines
description: The guidelines and processes for creating a VIP.
author: Kieran O'Neill (@kieranroneill)
status: Draft
created: 2024-09-05
---

## Abstract

At its core, a Voi Improvement Proposal (VIP) describes standards for the Voi ecosystem, including core protocol specifications, client APIs, and contract standards. This document outlines the guidelines for creating a VIP.

## Motivation

VIPs are intended to serve as a reference point within the Voi community and to encourage a cohesive consensus on standards.

## Specification

The keywords "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt) and [RFC 8174](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc8174.txt).

A VIP is a design document providing information to the Voi community, or, it describes a new feature for Voi or its processes or environment. A VIP should provide a concise technical specification of the feature and a rationale for the feature.

Fundamentally, VIPs are intended as the primary mechanism for driving standards in the Voi ecosystem, but they also serve as a reference point for the community.

### Category

VIP categories are intended to easily recognize the nature of a VIP. A VIP is categorized by placing the VIP in the corresponding directory

Each VIP **MUST** be categorized in one of the following types:

#### Meta (00)

Provides guidelines, procedures, changes to processes or information to the Voi community. Meta VIPs are (often) not technical. For instance, this VIP, which serves as a guideline to all VIPs, is categorized as Meta.

#### Core (01)

Proposed improvements to the core network protocol, e.g. increasing transaction fees.

#### Interface (02)

Improvements around client API/RPC specifications and also certain language-level standards like method names and contract ABIs. For example, a VIP that provides a JSON message schema for the communication between a dApp and a wallet.

#### Application (03)

Application-level standards and conventions, including contract standards such as token standards, name registries, URI schemes, library/package formats, and account abstraction.

> ðŸ’¡ **TIP:** A VIP **MAY** be referenced using the notation `VIP-<category>-<index>`, ensuring an individual can gauge the intention of the VIP. For example, a VIP within the Application category would be referenced as: `VIP-03-0200`.

### Index

Each VIP **MUST** have a non-conflicting index, between 0000-9999, associated with it. This index for the VIP can be assigned at the discretion of the author, but it **SHALL NOT** conflict with an existing VIP within the same category.

> âš ï¸ **NOTE:** When referencing a VIP's index, it is **RECOMMENDED** the padded zeroes are also included, i.e. 0010, not 10.

### Process

#### Designing A VIP

Before writing a VIP, it is highly **RECOMMENDED** that a VIP be the outcome or consequence of an existing process. In other words, a VIP can be a technical write-up of a technology that has been developed or is already in use.

> _Build first, write the specification later._

Following this ethos allows a specification to have a real world use-case and can highlight some issues and considerations that can be addressed before the VIP is formulated or as an important discussion point during the review of the VIP.

### Format

All VIPs **MUST** be written in the GitHub [markdown](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet) format. Here is a [template](../../vip-template.md) to follow.

## Rationale

<!--
  The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages.

  The current placeholder is acceptable for a draft.

  TODO: Remove this comment before submitting
-->

TBD

## Security Considerations

None.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../../LICENSE).
